---
suppress-bibliography: true
---

Dedicated to the *Mémoires de la vie de Henriette-Sylvie de Molière* (1671-1674) by Madame de Villedieu, this thesis studies the omnipresent and protean gaiety of the work. The gaiety of the *Mémoires* is often troubling: while it responds to the inescapable imperative of entertaining the reader, it reveals the violence of the world and of men. A study of its poetics allows us to shed light on the singular and unexpected perspective that runs through this novel-memoir. The first chapter analyzes certain elements of the narrative structure of the work (Baroni, Guardia) which, while provoking the pleasure of the reader, also carry a critical point of view on History, and particularly on the history of women. The second chapter consists of an exploration of the generic hybridity of the *Memoirs*. Both playful and polemical, these various transgressions of typically male scriptural codes challenge both the order of the written word and the values that structure it. The method used is inspired by discourse analysis (Maingueneau), and informed by several works on the poetics of literary forms. Finally, the third chapter examines Henriette-Sylvie's gaiety, as narrator and character, through the lens of rhetoric (Amossy, Barthes, Booth). While the narrator-character's witty and ironic repartee allows for the freer evocation of many realities contrary to the norms of decency, Henriette-Sylvie's unwavering cheerfulness also speaks to her obligation to please and entertain. Cheerfulness is then seen as part of an enunciative strategy to seduce and convince. In order to shed light on the historical, polemical and generic context with which the novel is in dialogue, this work also relies on works dealing with laughter and comedy in the classical age (Bertrand, Corréard, Grande), the Querelle des femmes in the social and literary space (Haase-Dubosc, Kelly, Viennot), and the Pyrrhonism of the libertines (Moreau, Popkin).

Keywords: French literature of the 17th century, poetics, women's literature, novel-memoirs, Querelle des femmes, discourse analysis, Madame de Villedieu
